Reorganize benchmark to include fairer comparisons (#27)
github/rust-gems: crates/bpe/README.md

Naive implementations for the other two operations will essentially have similar problems: either performance becomes very bad or counting is imprecise.

This library presents novel algorithms to compute BPE encodings which address those problems.
For the standard encoding or counting task, the algorithm is about 10x faster than the Huggingface BPE tokenizer.
The comparison with the Rust tiktoken implementation is more subtle, because pre-tokenization obscures the performance of the BPE algorithm by keeping BPE inputs small. In typical cases the algorithm performs similar to tiktoken, but worstcase inputs show the algorithm scales linearly where tiktoken scales quadraticly.

## Prior Art

There are mostly three strategies for BPE encoding.

1) Trivial solution. Search brute force for the most frequent pair in the encoded text according the dictionary and replace those occurrences. This has a `O(n^2)` complexity and is therefore not very appealing in production.
2) Heap based. Set up a heap with the frequencies. This improves the linear search time to a logarithmic factor. If done properly, the overall complexity reduces now to `O(n log n)`.

> 3) Split the input into sections of a maximum size first and then process each section individually. This shrinks in theory the complexity to `O(n)` if the section size is small enough. But it will in general produce now different results. In order to produce the "correct" encoding, one would need to choose split points at token boundaries. But without having the text encoded already, this is in general impossible. (Note that tiktoken as well as other tokenizers often split the input as part of pre-tokenization to improve model performance.)

Reviewer: > (Note that tiktoken as well as other tokenizers often split the input as part of pre-tokenization to improve model performance.)

Do you have a reference for this statement :)
Otherwise, I wouldn't claim that this was the reason why tiktoken did it...

Author: I thought I had it from [here](https://huggingface.co/blog/catherinearnett/dangers-of-tokenizer-recycling#pre-tokenizer), but it doesn't actually say why tiktoken or any of the others use it. On the other hand, I haven't found a reference either suggesting that pre-tokenization was done to improve tokenization performance.

Author: This is the closest I could find to anything on pre-tokenization: https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.01035. They study the effect of tokenization choices on model performance and note:

> Splitting sequences prevents BPE from merging certain tokens, for instance splitting on white spaces means that a token cannot span two space-separated words. It leads to shorter tokens and thus worse compression rates, but is generally done to improve downstream performance.

## Prior Art

There are mostly two strategies for BPE encoding.

1) Trivial solution. Search brute force for the most frequent pair in the encoded text according the dictionary and replace those occurrences. This has a `O(n^2)` complexity and is therefore not very appealing in production.
2) Heap based. Set up a heap with the frequencies. This improves the linear search time to a logarithmic factor. If done properly, the overall complexity reduces now to `O(n log n)`.

> Note that many tokenizers split the input into sections and then process each section individually. This shrinks in theory the complexity to `O(n)` if the section size is small enough. But it will in general produce now different results. In order to produce the "correct" encoding, one would need to choose split points at token boundaries. But without having the text encoded already, this is in general impossible. Input splitting may is therefore not a viable strategy for improving encoding performance.

Reviewer: didn't check whether we use the term `section` in other places. But I think `chunk` or `substring` would be the better term.

The benchmark measured the runtime of encoding of slices of lengths 10, 100, 1000, and 10000 from a random 20000 token original text using the o200k token set.
(All encodings were computed from scratch for each slice.)

> Be aware that this benchmark none of the tokenizers pre-tokenize the input.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Be aware that in this benchmark none of our(?) tokenizers pre-tokenize the input.
```

The runtime of the backtracking encoder grows with the length of the slice.
The interval encoder counts any interval in typically constant time.

![counting runtime comparison](./images/performance-counting.svg)

### Comparison with other tokenizers

We compared the encoding performance of our encoder with two popular implementations, tiktoken and Huggingface tokenizers.

The benchmark measured the runtime of encoding of slices of lengths 10, 100, 1000, and 10000 from a random 20000 token original text using the o200k token set.
(All encodings were computed from scratch for each slice.)

In this benchmark all tokenizers pre-tokenize their input and produce the same tokens and decoded texts as the tiktoken tokenizer.
An effect of pre-tokenization is that the inputs to the actual BPE logic are typically much smaller than the overall input size, especially for larger inputs.

> It is therefore difficult to judge the performance differences of the BPE logic fromt his benchmark.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is therefore difficult to judge the performance differences of the BPE logic from this benchmark.
```

It does give a good indication of how the algorithms might perform in practice.

The graph below shows encoding runtime vs slice length.
All encoders (except the heap encoder) show the expected linear runtime complexity.
The backtracking encoder, the fastest encoder that still returns correct results, shows a performance gain of approximately 3.5x compared to tiktoken.
The fully dynamic programming solution and the heap implementation are still quite competitive to TikToken (especially for smaller inputs).

> If the requirement of correct BPE output can be relaxed, then the Greedy approach or the minimal encoding approach are the clear winners.

Author: You're right, that shouldn't be there
